imagine NASA announced today that they
found aliens bacteria on Mars weird
alien fish in the oceans of Europa and
also ancient alien ruins on Titan
wouldn't that be great well no it would
be horrible news devastating even it
could mean that the end of humanity is
almost certain and that it might be
coming soon why white would the most
exciting discovery of our lifetime be
bad let us imagine the development of
life from its inception to us today as a
flight of stairs
the first step is dead chemistry that
needs to assemble itself into
self-replicating patterns stable and
resilient but also able to change and
evolve the second step is for our early
life to become more complex able to
build more complicated structures and
use the available energy much more
efficiently on the next step these cells
combine to become multicellular beings
enabling unbelievable variety and
further complexity the step above sees
the species evolve big brains enabling
the use of tools culture and shared
knowledge which creates even higher
complexity the species can now become
the dominant life-form on its planet and
change it according to its needs first
of shai attempts to leave its planets
are happening this is where we are now
it's in the nature of life as we know it
to reach out to cover every Lygia can
and since planets have a limited
carrying capacity and life span if a
species wants to survive it will look
for more places to spread to so the
steps above the current ones seem
logical colonize your own solar system
then spread further to reach other stars
to the possible final step become
galaxy-wide civilization it's very
likely that this is a universal
principle for civilizations no matter
where they're from if a species is
competitive and drivel enough to take
control over its planet they'll probably
not stop there we know that there are up
to 500 billion planets in the Milky Way
at least 10 billion earth-like planets
many have been around billions of years
longer than earth but we're observing
zero Galactic Civilizations we should be
able to see something but there's
nothing space seems to be empty and dead
this means something is preventing
living things from climbing the
staircase beyond the step we're on right
now something that makes becoming a
galactic civilization extremely hard
maybe impossible this is the great
filter a challenge or danger so hard to
overcome that it eliminates almost every
species that encounters it there are two
scenarios one means we are incredibly
special and lucky the other one means we
aren't doomed and practically already
dead it depends on whether filter is on
our staircase behind or ahead of us
scenario one the filter is behind us we
are the first if the filter is behind us
that means that one of the steps we
passed is almost impossible to take
which step could it be is life itself
extremely rare
it's very hard to make predictions about
how likely it is for life to emerge from
death things there is no consensus some
scientists think it develops everywhere
where the conditions are right others
think that earth might be the only
living place in the universe another
candidate is the step of complex animal
cells a very specific thing happened on
this step and as far as we know it
happened exactly once a primitive hunter
cells swallowed another cell but instead
of devouring it the two cells formed a
union the bigger cell provided shelter
took care of interacting with the
environment and providing resources
while the smaller one used its new home
and free stuff to focus on providing a
lot of extra energy for its host with
the abundant energy the host cell could
grow more than before and build new and
expensive things to improve itself while
the guest became the powerhouse of the
cell these cells make up every animal on
the planet maybe there are billions of
bacteria covered planets in the Milky
Way but not a single one apart from us
has achieved our level of complexity or
intelligence we humans feel very smart
and sophisticated with our crossword
puzzles and romantic novels but a big
brain is first and foremost a very
expensive evolutionary investment they
are fragile they don't help in a
fistfight with a bath they cost enormous
amounts of energy and despite them it
took modern humans 200,000 years to get
from sharp sticks to civilization being
smart does not mean you get to win
automatically maybe intelligence is just
not so great and we're lucky that it
worked out for us scenario two the
filter is ahead of us plenty of others
died already a great filter before us is
orders of magnitude more dangerous than
anything we encountered so far even if a
major disaster killed most of us or
threw us back thousands of years we
would survive and recover and if we can
recover even if it takes a million years
then it's not a great filter but just a
roadblock to an eventual galactic
civilization on universal timescales
even millions of years adjust the blink
of an eye if a great filter really lies
before us it has to be so dangerous so
purely devastating and powerful that it
has destroyed most if not all advanced
civilizations in our galaxy over
billions of years a really daunting and
depressing hypothesis is that once a
species takes control over its planet
it's already on the path to
self-destruction technology is a good
way to achieve that it needs to be
something that's so obvious that
virtually everybody discovers it and so
dangerous that its discovery leads
almost universally to an existential
disaster a large-scale nuclear war
nanotechnology that gets out of control
genetic engineering of the perfect super
bug an experiment that lights the whole
atmosphere on fire it might be a super
intelligent AI that accidentally or
purposely destroys its creators all
things that we can't even see coming
right now
or it's way simpler speech is
competitive enough to take over their
planet necessarily destroy it while
competing with each other for resources
maybe there aren't runaway chain
reactions in every ecosystem that once
set in motion are not fixable and so
once a civilization is powerful enough
to change the composition of its
atmosphere they make their planet
uninhabitable 100% of the time let's
hope that that's not the case if the
filter is ahead of us our odds are
really bad what we can hope for this is
why finding life beyond Earth would be
horrible the more common life is in the
universe and the more advanced and
complex it is the more likely it becomes
that a filter is in front of us
bacteria would be bad small animals
would be worse intelligent life would be
alarmist ruins of ancient alien
civilizations would be horrible the best
case scenario for us right now is that
Mars is sterile that Europa's oceans are
devoid of life and the vast arms of the
Milky Way Harbor only empty oceans
hugging dead continents that there are
billions of empty planets waiting to be
discovered and to be filled out with
life billions of new homes waiting for
us to finally arrive how likely is it
that we'll find life outside of Earth
that is similar to us well that depends
on how many planets there are out there
in their stars Goldilocks zone the area
around a star where water can be liquid
because stars come in all sizes and
configurations this zone is different
for every star system and requires a
little bit of physics to figure out if
that sounds like fun to you this quiz
from brilliant helps to break down the
maths for exactly how this is calculated
brilliant is a problem-solving website
that teaches you to think like a
scientist by guiding you through
problems they take concepts like these
break them up into bite-sized bits
present clear thinking in each part and
then build back up to an interesting
conclusion if you visit brilliant org
slash nutshell or click the link in the
description you can sign up for free and
learn all kinds of things and as a bonus
for Cortazar viewers the first 688
people will also get 20% off their and
your membership and if you do find life
on our planet it may be wise to leave
them alone for a while